---
title: Using the MAX7219CNG LED Display Driver
shortTitle: Using the MAX7219CNG
image: electronics/max7219-addressing.jpg
---

## Introduction

MAX7219CNG is a programmable display driver integrated circuit that is used to
control a large array of LEDs while consuming a relatively small number of GPIO
pins.  It receives input commands via four SPI pins, and uses these commands to
drive either an 8x8 matrix of LEDs, or an eight-digit [seven-segment display][].

[MAX7219CNG DIP chips can be purchased][adafruit max7219cng page] as
standalone components, but I find it a lot cheaper to buy them as a part of an
[LED matrix kit][oddwires matrix kit] for substantially lower cost.  Buying the
chip with an LED matrix also makes it easier to get started since the kit means
you only have to worry about power, ground, and three SPI input pins.

On this page, I will demonstrate some of the basics of MAX7219CNG using an 8x8
matrix kit, which can be purchased very inexpensively (e.g., the [chip and the
LED matrix for $3][oddwires matrix kit]).

## Communicating with MAX7219CNG via SPI

The MAX7219CNG has a bona fide command protocol, built on SPI, where you send
12-bit packet that encodes both a 4-bit command and an 8-bit value.  In this
packet, the Most Significant Bits (MSBs), or the ones that are sent first,
encode the command, and the Least Significant Bits (LSBs) encode the data.
The specific packet is constructed such that

- bits 0-3 encode a command
- bits 4-11 encode the value that should be passed to the command

This chip has the following commands:

- Set a specific column (or "digit") of LEDs to a specific combination of on and off.  This MAX7219CNG chip supports eight columns of LEDs, so there are 8 different command codes that are used to set each of them.
- Set the "decode mode" for each column
- Set the brightness of the illuminated LEDs
- Enable or disable entire columns
- Enable or disable "shutdown mode," where all LEDs are turned off
- Enable or disable "test mode," where all LEDs are turned on at the highest brightness

The very first thing I did after soldering the components together was to enable
test mode to make sure all the LEDs did light up.  The packet we send to the
MAX7219 should look like this:

{{ figure("max7219-packet.png", alt="Depiction of the MAX7219 command packet") }}

where the `1111` command code corresponds with test mode, and the `00000001`
value means enable.  Python has a really easy way of encoding these bits into
variables that don't require bit shift operators:

    :::python
    cmd = int("1111", 2)
    value = int("0000001", 2)
    packet = cmd | value

Alternatively, you can just encode the whole packet directly:

    :::python
    packet = int("11110000001", 2)

Then sending these bits down the MOSI pin will enable test mode, and all 64
LEDs should turn on at the highest brightness.  To disable test mode, send the
same command (`1111`) but a zero value (`00000000`), or

    :::python
    packet = int("111100000000", 2)

This test mode also overrides the values of the other settings, so it should
illuminate all LEDs at full brightness no matter what.  If any LEDs are
flickering, dim, or unlit, there is a physical problem with either the LED
(i.e., it is damaged) or a solder joint somewhere.

For reference, all of these registers and their function are documented in the
[MAX7219 datasheet][] provided by the manufactuerer.

## Initializing the MAX7219CNG

It's a bit misleading to refer to the 4-bit command codes as such; they're
actually register addresses, and the 12-bit packets we send actually program
(write to) these special-purpose registers.  I mention this now because the
contents of these registers at any given time determine how the LEDs are
illuminated; it follows that you need to be sure you know the contents of
those registers when your program first starts.  Since there is no way to read
the contents of these registers off of the MAX7219CNG (because there is no
MISO pin), this means explicitly setting all of the registers.

So, let's first zero out all registers:

    :::python
    # range(16) because there are 16 command registers, 0000 through 1111
    for cmd in range(16):
        packet = cmd << 8
        # e.g., if cmd is 0101, 0101 << 8 becomes 010100000000
        spi.put(packet,12)

Then there are two specific registers that must have nonzero values for all
LEDs to work correctly:

1. The scan limit register (`1011`) must have its three least significant bits
   set to 1, so the packet should be `101100000111`.  This register provides a
   way to disable columns of LEDs, so by setting it to 111 (i.e., 8), we are
   enabling all eight columns.
2. The shutdown register (`1100`) must be set to 1, so the packet should be
   `110000000001`.  When set to 0, this register shuts off all of the LEDs but
   doesn't forget their on/off state.  Thus, when you set this register, the
   LEDs light back up just as you had them before shutting down.

Once the MAX7219 is initialized, we can set LED patterns.

## Programming the MAX7219

The MAX2719 chip divides a set of 64 LEDs into eight columns ("digits") of eight
LEDs each.  The columns are numbered 1 through 8, and each LED within a column
is represented by a single bit in that column's register.

{{ figure("max7219-addressing.jpg", alt="the MAX7219CNG addressing layout") }}

The 4-bit command sequence to address a column is just that column's index.  In
the above photo, column two can be programmed using `0010`, which is the binary
representation of the 2.  Similarly, column 8 can be addressed using `1000`.

The 8-bit value portion of the SPI packet represents whether each LED in that
column should be on (1) or off (0).  The most-significant bit addresses the
bottom-most LED, and the least-significant bit addresses the top-most.  So in
the above photo, column 2's register contains `00100111`.  Thus, to get column
2 lit up as shown, you would send an SPI packet that was `001000100111`.

A complete Python script that does this using [my simple Python SPI] package
might look like

<script src="https://gist.github.com/glennklockwood/df3ff8776814aa96d69ed13a8861134c.js?file=max7219-column2.py"></script>

You can then alter another column, and the value of this column remains the
same.  For example, we can then fill columns 5-8 with a random pattern:

    :::python
    import random
    for column in (5, 6, 7, 8):
        register_addr = column << 8
        value = random.randint(0, 2**8-1)
        max7219.put(register_addr|value,12)

or even more, put this random pattern generator in a loop:

<script src="https://gist.github.com/glennklockwood/df3ff8776814aa96d69ed13a8861134c.js?file=max7219-randomize-col5-8.py"></script>

to demonstrate that each column can be configured separately:

{{ figure("max7219-random5-8.gif", alt="Filling columns 5-8 with random values") }}

This covers the basics of lighting up an 8x8 matrix of LEDs using the MAX7219.

## Practical Programming

While the MAX7219 does provide a very simple way to control all 64 LEDs, you
must program LEDs in terms of entire columns of 8 LEDs at a time. As a result,
it's not very easy to change the state of a single LED within a column, or to
change a row.  And, because there is no way to ask the MAX7219 what the current
state of its registers are, you wind up having to make your application keep
track of the state of every LED.

The data structure you use to save the on/off state of each LED can be as simple
or complicated as you want.  The simplest possible way is using a 64-element
list:

    :::python
    led_state = [0] * 64
    def update_state(led_state, column, row, state):
        return led_state[column * 8 + row] = state

    update_state(led_state, column=2, row=3, state=1)
    update_state(led_state, column=2, row=3, state=0)

However, this highlights a mild annoyance with addressing specific LEDs in
MAX7219:

- columns are numbered 1-8 (i.e., register address `0001` through `1000`)
- Python numbers indices from 0-7 

This means that the first element in our list (`led_state[0]`) corresponds to
the column at register `0001`.  Not the end of the world, but something to bear
in mind when converting user input to column register addresses.

To convert a single column from our `led_state` list into an SPI command, we
have to do some bitwise manipulations.  For example,

    :::python
    register = (column+1) << 8
    value = 0
    for row in range(8):
        value <<= 1
        if led_state[column*8 + row]:
            value |= 1

    packet = register | value

which

1. sets the register address of the column we are modifying.  `column+1` allows
   us to specify columns 0-7 (to match rows 0-7) but still get the correct
   register addresses (1-8)
2. initializes our value to `00000000`
3. probes each value in `led_state` that corresponds to our value
   - shift all previous bits in our `value` over by one
   - if the value is true/on, set the zero value we just used to shift our
    `value` to "on" (1); otherwise, leave it as "off" (0)
4. combines the 4-bit register address and 8-bit value to generate the packet
   which we send to the MAX7219

A complete Python program which uses this approach to set individual LEDs on or
off might look like this:

<!-- <script src="https://gist.github.com/glennklockwood/df3ff8776814aa96d69ed13a8861134c.js?file=max7219-individual-leds.py"></script> -->

    :::python
    #!/usr/bin/env python
    """Change the state of a single LED in an 8x8 matrix.
    """

    import spi

    ### Initialize an SPI connection using BCM-mode pins 21, 20, and 16
    max7219 = spi.SPI(clk=21, cs=20, mosi=16, miso=None, verbose=True)

    ### Zero out all registers
    for cmd in range(16):
        packet = cmd << 8
        max7219.put(packet,12)

    ### Set the scan limit register and disable shutdown mode
    max7219.put(int("101100000111",2),12)
    max7219.put(int("110000000001",2),12)

    ### We zeroed out all registers, so all LEDs are off (0)
    led_state = [0]*64

    def set_led(row, column, state):
        ### update our saved state
        led_state[column*8 + row] = state

        ### convert the new column into an SPI command
        register = (column+1) << 8
        value = 0
        for row in range(8):
            value <<= 1
            if led_state[column*8+row]:
                value |= 1

        max7219.put(register|value,12)

    while True:
        row, col, state = input("Enter a row, col, state: ")
        set_led(row, col, state)

Of course, using Python lists is not always the best way to store and update
the state of each LED; for example, using an 8x8 numpy matrix may be a more
logical data structure to use.

## Other Features

The [MAX7219 datasheet][] presents all of the features of the chip, and many are
worth playing with.  For example, playing with the LED intensity register allows
you to make the LEDs pulse in different ways:

{{ figure("max7219-heartbeat.gif", alt="Pulsing the LED intensity register") }}

The code to create the beating heart pattern above is quite simple, and it is
available in [my GitHub repository][beating heart code in GitHub].

[seven-segment display]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seven-segment_display
[adafruit max7219cng page]: https://www.adafruit.com/product/453
[oddwires matrix kit]: http://www.oddwires.com/led-matrix-8-x-8-red-common-cathode-with-spi-interface-max7219cng/
[MAX7219 datasheet]: https://www.maximintegrated.com/en/products/power/display-power-control/MAX7219.html
[my simple Python SPI]: https://github.com/glennklockwood/raspberrypi/blob/master/spi.py
[beating heart code in GitHub]: https://github.com/glennklockwood/raspberrypi/blob/a2dbb1ae6580593d11e3e043a1435a63abe58d1d/led-matrix-heart.py
