---
title: 5. Basic Analysis
shortTitle: Basic Analysis
order: 50
---

## The MD Output

The output of the MD code itself (referred to as output in
[Section 2](2-our-code.html) is perhaps the most important simulation output
to examine for two reasons:

1. It exists in plain text, so you can easily read it using `vi`, `cat`,
   `tail`, etc.
2. It provides a number of metrics that will quickly tell if your simulation
   has gone awry

Additionally, the output is regularly updated (thanks to `iprint`) which allows
you to quickly tell if a simulation is going afoul without having to wait for
the simulation to complete.

The output file generally shows the following information in the following
order:

1. all of the inputted parameters from `pressure.list`, `tape5`, and all
   positions, velocities, and ltypes of all atoms in the starting configuration
   (either from `knite12` or as generated by the MD code when `ntype` = 1).
2. the output of each iprint.  This is generally the most useful data.
3. a summary of the data from the iprints (average and instantaneous
   temperature, energy, pressure)
4. positions, velocities, and ltypes of all atoms in the final configuration
   of the simulation

The data from each iprint contains the most immediately useful data; after
opening the output file in vi, you can easily jump straight to this section by
typing slash (`/)` to enter the text-search mode, then enter `elaps` and press
return to jump straight to the first iprint's data.  You will see output that
should look something like this:

<table>
<tr>
<td>
```
 elapsed time is  0.10000000E-11 ...
```
</td>
<td>
This line begins each new print
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>
```
basic parameters
  nmol      temp        xl        ...
  1536    0.30000D+03 0.28525D-06 ...
```
</td>
<td>
<ul>
<li><code>nmol</code> is the number of atoms in your system</li>
<li><code>temp</code> is the temperature setting from tape5</li>
<li><code>xl</code>, <code>yl</code>, and <code>zl</code> are the dimensions of your simulation box in cm</li>
<li><code>deltim</code> is the integration timestep from <code>tape</code>5</li>
<li><code>rc</code> is the interaction cutoff distance from <code>tape</code>5</li>
</ul>

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
```
reference value of total energy ...
```
</td>
<td>
This is the value against which the system's energy is compared to calculate
the energy drift (see below).
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
```
average values for last  1000 ...
 potential energy -0.24248972E-10 ...
 temperature       0.32738174E+03 ...
 pressure          0.51779621E+05atm
 compressibility   0.23898885E-20
```
</td>
<td>
These are the values for temperature, pressure, potential energy, and
compressibility averaged since the last print.  The quantities that enter into
this average are sampled every <code>icheck</code> iterations.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
```
absolute value of energy drift ...
```
</td>
<td>
The average energy drift in constant-energy simulations is an indicator of
numerical error that enters into the simulation due to the limitations of the
computer.  This value would be zero on an infinitely precise computer; our
simulations should have an E<sub>drift</sub> < 10<sup>-5</sup> E<sub>total</sub>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
```
instantaneous values
 potential energy -0.24256554E-10
 kinetic energy    0.62109000E-13
 total energy     -0.24195585E-10
 energy drift      0.11404493E-14
 temperature       0.30000000E+03
  three-body  contribution to ...
```
</td>
<td>
These are system properties from the configuration at which the iprint was
initiated.  During equilibration (<code>iequil</code> &lt; <code>icalc</code>),
the temperature here will always be equal to temp from tape5 even though the
average temperature above may be different.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
```
restart data stored after  1000 iterations
```
</td>
<td>
This line is printed every istore to indicate that the knite9 has been updated.
</td>
</tr>
</table>

Note that the values printed are typically in CGS units; energy is in ergs
(10<sup>-7</sup> J or 4.814 &times; 10<sup>+10</sup> kcal) and dimensions are in
cm.

Always examine the output file from your simulation after it is complete to
verify that the simulation proceeded as you expected.   At minimum, you should
always verify that

- for constant pressure runs, the system's dimensions and density haven't gone
  crazy.  Check the first few prints and the last few prints.
- for constant volume runs, the system's temperature hasn't shot up or frozen
  down.  Again, check the first few and last few prints.
- the simulation actually completed and didn't crash after a few thousand
  iterations.  Search the output for the phrase "final positions."

Mistakes in `tape5` can most often be caught by checking the above items, and
virtually every student has lost weeks of progress at some point because those
weeks of work were based upon a simulation that wasn't run correctly.

---
Next page: [The Radial Distribution Function](6-rdf.html)
